#  cs 394 introduction to computer architecture

**assignment 2**  

**name**  morgan bergen

**wsu id**  b493r546

----

**question 1 discuss six important classes of computers.  for each class, mention at least two notable features**

personal computers (pc)

computers designed for use by an individual, usually incorporating a graphics display, a keyboard, and a mouse.  one notable feature is that they emphasize delivery of good performance and are specifically designed for individual use, meaning that they are not shared with other users, and are typically used for personal tasks such as word processing, web browsing, gaming, software development, and more.  another notable feature is that they are designed to have the following components such as a processor cpu, memory ram, storage, graphics processing unit cpu, input / output ports, operating system, display, connectivity to the internet, and more.

servers

a computer used for running larger programs for multiple users, often simultaneously, and typically accessed only via a network.  one notable feature is that they are oriented to carrying large workloads, workloads such as single complex applications for scientific or engineering applications, or small jobs such as serving web pages for a large web server.  another feature is that they have the same technology as desktop computers, but provide for greater computing in storage, input / output, and networking.  they are emphasized for computation but rather they are optimized for for reliability, throughput, availability, and flexibility.

supercomputers

a class of computers with the highest performance and cost; they are configured as servers and typically cost tens to hundreds of millions of dollars.  one feature is that they consist of tens of thousands of processors optimized for parallel processing, have many terabytes of memory, can perform massive computations across thousands or millions of cores, and cost tens to hundreds of millions of dollars.  another feature is that they are designed for high end scientific and engineering calculations for weather forecasting, oil exploration, protein structure determination, and other large scale problems.  

embedded computers

embedded computers are the largest class of computers and span the widest range of applications and performance, they are computers inside another device used for running one predetermined application or collection of software.  one feature is that they are low cost and have lower tolerance for failure.  embedded computers are designed for embedded applications and have very unique application requirements that combine a minimum performance with stringent limitations on cost or power.  

personal mobile devices (pmd)

pmd's are small wireless devices that connected to the internet, they rely on batteries for power, and software is installed by downloading applications.  some conventional examples of personal mobile devices are smart phones and tablets.  one feature of pmd's are that they do not always have a keyboard or mouse, but rather a touch screen interface.  another feature is that they are designed to be portable and have a long battery life, and are designed to be used for personal tasks such as web browsing, email, social media, and more.

warehouse scale computers (wsc)

warehouse scale computer are designed to operate at the scale of an entire data center and support large scale internet facing application.  one feature is that these systems are optimized for managing and delivering services like cloud computing which refers to a large collection of servers that provide servers over the internet.  cloud computing has providers such as amazon web services, google cloud platform, and microsoft azure and are used to be rented dynamically varying numbers of servers as a utility.  a second feature of warehouse scale computer is that they are commodity servers networked together to act as a single cohesive system, they focus on scalability, energy efficiency , fault tolerance, and manage vast amounts of data and user requests.

quantum computers

another additional class of computers are quantum computers which are designed to solve certain problems that classical computers find unsolvable.  they excel at tasks involving massive parallelism, optimization problems, cryptography, and simulating quantum systems.  one feature is that they reply on quantum bits (qubits) instead of classical bits, qubits can represent 0, 1, or both simultaneously which is a concept called superposition.  another feature is that they require an extremely precise conditions to operating including near-absolute zero temperatures and magnetic shielding to prevent interference from the environment.

**question 2  discuss the great ideas about computer architecture**

design for moore's law

moore's law is the observation that there is a trend of increasing transistor density on microchips specifically that integrated circuit recourses double every 18-24 months, it resulted from a 1965 prediction of growth in ic integrated circuit capacity made by gordon moore who is one of the founders of intel.  moore's law implies that there is an exponential growth in computing power.

use abstraction to simplify design

this idea refers to the practice of breaking down complex systems in both hardware and software into multiple layers of representation.  at each layer or level of abstraction, the details of the underlying system are hidden, allowing designers, developers, or architects to focus on only the relevant features of their scope of work, without needing to understand the entire system and all of the intricate details from lower levels.  abstraction hides complexity and allows for a model to be simplified based on different layers of representation. 

make the common case fast

this idea is a design principle that focuses on optimizing the performance of tasks or operations that occur most frequently, rather than spending significant resources on optimizing rare or edge cases.  this involves profiling the system or application to understand which operations are executed most frequently.

performance via parallelism

is a design principle technique in computer architecture where multiple operations are performed simultaneously to achieve greater performance.  parallelism involves splitting tasks into smaller, independent sub-tasks that can be executed simultaneously across multiple processing units.    

performance via pipelining

pipelining is a specific type of parallelism where a task is divided into smaller stages that can be executed in sequence, with each stage processing a different part of the task simultaneously.  pipelining improves performance by allowing multiple operations to be processed concurrently.

performance via prediction

performance via prediction is a principle where systems make educated guesses about future events or outcomes to improve performance.  instead of waiting for full certainty or verification, a system begins processing based on prediction which can speed up performance if the prediction is accurate.  

hierarchy of memories

this is a design strategy where different types of memory are organized into layers based on their speed, size, and cost.  this approach balances the trade offs between fast, large, and cheap memory which are often conflicting depends in computing systems.  the fastest, smallest, and most expensive memory per bit is located at the top of the hierarchy in a pyramid structure, and the slowest, largest, and cheapest per bit is located at the bottom of the hierarchical structure.  

dependability via redundancy

this is a design principle that focuses on enuring system reliability and availability by including extra or backup components that can take over in case of failure.  since any physical device can fail due to wear adn tear, manufacturing defects, or external factors, redundancy helps ensure that the system continues to function correctly even when one or more components fail.

**question 3  match from the great ideas about computer architecture to the following ideas from other fields**  

**a -  suspension bridge cables** - dependability via redundancy

suspension bridge cables use multiple stands of wire for redundancy, so if one strand fails, the structure remains stable, similar to how redundancy ensure system dependability in computer architecture.

**b -  aircraft and marine navigation systems that incorporate wind information** -  performance via prediction

navigating systems predict wind conditions to optimize routes, which in turn improves performance, similar to how cpu's predict future instructions to improve execution speed

**c -  express elevators in buildings** -  performance via pipelining

express elevators stop only at the selected floors, allowing faster transit by not waiting at every floor, pipelining divides tasks into stages to improve performance by processing multiple operations simultaneously

**d -  library reserve desk** -  hierarchy of memories

a library of desks holds frequently requested books closer to users, while less commonly used books are stored elsewhere.  this is similar to how memory is organized in a hierarchy, with fast memory storing frequently accessed data and slow memory storing less accessed data.

**e -  adding electronic magnetic aircraft catapults (which are electrically powered as opposed to current stream powered models), allowed by the increased power generation offered by the new reactor technology** -  design for moore's law

moore's law anticipates increasing power and efficiency over time, just as the development of a new reactor technology allows for more advanced systems to be designed.

**question 4  discuss three major levels of program code**

the three major levels of program code refer to different levels of abstraction in programming languages, high level languages such as python, java, or c++ are human readable which allow for easier development and maintenance of software.  the highest level of programming languages are translated into a lower level of a programming language via a compiler from a high level language to a lower level language, specifically into assembly language such as x86 or mips.  assembly language corresponds directly to the instructions that a cpu executes with one assembly instruction typically mapping to a single machine instruction.  a this is then translated again into machine code which is the lowest level of a programming language, it is directly executable by the hardware and consists of a series of 0s and 1s that represent specific instructions understood by the processor.

```
high level language starts out as a program written in a high level language such as c, c++, or java

swap(int v[], int k) {
    int temp;
    temp = v[k];
    v[k] = v[k+1];
    v[k+1] = temp;
    }

compiled into assembly language for mips

swap:
    multi $2, $5, 4
    add $2, $4, $2
    lw $15, 0($2)
    lw $16, 4($2)
    sw $16, 0($2)
    sw $15, 4($2)
    jr $31

translated into machine code via a assembler into binary

00000000101000100000000100011000
00000000100000100001000000100001
10001101111000100000000000000000
10001110000100100000000000000100
10101110000100100000000000000000
10101101111000100000000000000100
00000011111000000000000000001000
```

**question 5  discuss important components of a computer -  cpu, memory, input / output devices**

the cpu is often referred to the brian of the computer.  it is responsible for executing instructions and performing calculations.  the cpu interprets and processes data from memory and controls the operations of other components.  the cpu consists of an arithmetic logic unit (alu) which performs arithmetic and logical operations, a control unit which manages the execution of instructions, and registers which store data and instructions.  the cpu fetches instructions from memory, decodes them, and executes them in a sequence of steps called the instruction cycle.

memory is used to store data and instructions that the cpu needs to access quickly.  memory is divided into two main types: primary memory and secondary memory.  primary memory, also known as ram, is volatile and stores data and instructions that are currently being used by the cpu.  secondary memory, such as hard drives or ssds, is non-volatile and stores data and instructions that are not currently being used by the cpu.  memory is organized into a hierarchy of levels based on speed, size, and cost, with faster, smaller, and more expensive memory located at the top of the hierarchy.

input / output devices allow users to interact with the computer and exchange data with the outside world.  input devices such as keyboards, mice, and touch screens allow users to input data into the computer.  output devices such as monitors, printers, and speakers allow the computer to display information to the user.  input / output devices are connected to the computer via input / output ports, which allow data to be transferred between the computer and the devices.  input / output devices are controlled by the cpu, which sends and receives data to and from the devices.